# PolarSSL Security Advisory 2013-02

**Title** |  RC4 ciphersuites in SSL and TLS vulnerable
---|---
**CVE** |  Unknown
**Date** |  13th of March 2013
**Affects** |  all SSL libraries including PolarSSL
**Not affected** |  AES-GCM-based or CBC-based ciphersuites. Servers and
clients that only communicate over a private network
**Impact** |  Possible (partial) recovery of plaintext
**Exploit** |  Withheld
**Solution** |  Disable RC4-based ciphersuites
**Credits** |  Nadhem AlFardan, Dan Bernstein, Kenny Paterson, Bertram
Poettering and Jacob Schuldt

[On the Security of RC4 in TLS](http://www.isg.rhul.ac.uk/tls) describes an
attack that applies to implementations of RC4-mode ciphersuites in all version
of SSL and TLS.

The attack is based on the fact that statistical flaws in the keystream
generated by the RC4 algorithm become apparent in TLS ciphertexts when the
same plaintext is repeatedly encrypted at a fixed location across many TLS
sessions.

## Impact

When a RC4-based ciphersuite is used and an adversary has the ability to
inject packets at will into the connection between the client and the server,
the adversary can potentially use statistical analysis to retrieve plaintext
from ciphertext messages.

## Resolution

As the flaw is inherent to the use of RC4 ciphersuites, the only resolution is
to disable the use of RC4-based ciphersuites within PolarSSL.

At compile-time this can be achieved by removing the define for
**POLARSSL_ARC4_C** from _include/polarssl/config.h_.

An alternative is to remove the ciphersuites from the list of ciphersuites
provided to **ssl_set_ciphersuites()**.

## Advice

We strongly advise you to consider if your application needs RC4-dependent
ciphersuites and disable them if you have the option. No real action is needed
if an adversary cannot gain access to (part of) the network and thus cannot
inject packets between your servers and clients.
